title: Highlighting Features in Mapbox GL JS
subtitle: A Comparison of Filter and Feature-State
tags:
  - mapbox
  - web maps
img: featurestate.png
categories: []
date: 2019-11-17 16:36:00
---
Creating a 'hover' effect is a great way to add interactivity to web maps. In mapbox-gl there at least two methods to accomplish this feature: ``setFeatureState()`` and ``setFilter()``. Up until now (late 2019) I have been using the ``setFilter`` method for a highlight and hover effect on the City of Zanesville web maps. These maps relied on vector-tiles generated by Mapbox, which do not contain unique feature IDs and therefore do not work (at least as of this blog post) with the feature-state method. An example of this can be found [here](https://bl.ocks.org/reyemtm/400485be6027f197952e073ac0658be4).

In my current setup, the ``setFilter`` method works by adding a copy of the active layer to the map. To achieve the highlight effect the layer filter is set to a unique field of the layer from the clicked or moused-over feature. An example of this method is shown in the iframe below. 

<iframe height="400px" width="100%" src="/apps/mapbox-highlight/filter/"></iframe>
*A map with the setFilter method.*

Although this method works, if the user moves quickly across the map, the filter takes a few seconds to 'catch-up'. If this method is used just for highlighting clicked features, this lag may not be noticeable, however it is not well suited for a hover effect.

In the fall of 2019 Zanesville began self-hosting our vector tiles, so this seemed like a perfect opportunity to test out the feature-state method. This method works similar to the filter method in that a duplicate layer is again added to the map. This is to avoid having to create feature-state pain properties in all our map layers. However in this instance the feature-state is used instead of filter, and the performance improvements are dramatic.

<figure>
  <iframe height="400px" width="100%" src="/apps/mapbox-highlight/featurestate/"></iframe>
  <figcaption>*A map with the setFilter method.*
</figcaption>
</figure>

### Further Reading
- https://docs.mapbox.com/help/tutorials/create-interactive-hover-effects-with-mapbox-gl-js/

- https://blog.mapbox.com/going-live-with-electoral-maps-a-guide-to-feature-state-b520e91a22d

- https://docs.mapbox.com/mapbox-gl-js/example/hover-styles/
  	

